title: "AI Architecture"
keywords: 
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
toc: true
permalink: ai_Businessadoption_AICoE.html
folder: engagement_model
summary: "Business Adoption and AI CoE "
tags: 
  - topic_area
  - AI
  - AI Center of Exellence 


Business Adoption: Businesses are trying to hit their stride with AI, deciding which use cases to prioritize and how to move adoption forward. At the sametime the enterprises are grappling with uncertainty amid a barrage of tariff changes by the latest WhiteHouse administration and consumer spending pullbacks.Using AI to cushion against potential headwinds by unlocking efficiencies and driving savings will likely rise in importance as the volatility persists.While ROI isn’t guaranteed, some companies are already tying their AI progress to tangible results. 
Most businesses that have yet to reach ROI from their AI initiatives expect to realize cost savings in the next three years, with around 44% anticipating a quicker turn, according to an IBM report. 

Firstly, I sincerely believe AI adoption ( Generative AI more precisely) is all about people and how work gets done. Generative AI is not replacing people, but people who use generative AI are replacing people who don’t. Anchoring on human talent is essential. Help your people to understand what they need to do. Effective change management becomes essential to help employees embrace and effectively use genAI/AI tools.
Secondly, there is no one size fits all solution for genAI adoption. There are a multitude of options. These include choosing between building or buying foundation models, exploring prompt engineering approaches, or developing custom gen AI solutions. 

With a strong AI strategy in place for an organization, make people, not technology central to your generative AI (AI adoption) strategy. Hence rolling out an AI Center of excellence (COE) team as part of the operating model within the Data and Analytics domain is a right place to start. The team composition can initially start with 
> AI product owner responsible for executing the AI strategy by engaging different business stakeholders looking to explore or implement AI capabilities in their respective application developments. Streamlining the business case intake, working with the business stakeholders to have them establish clarity on how these business use cases are mapped to what business objectives they intend to achieve. It is imperative for the AI product owner to set the right tone, have the groundwork done with the business use case and take a first stab at use case evaluation, feasibility and priority of taking it up before bringing into a wider COE discussion.
> Data and Analytics lead: Like the saying goes ‘basic plumbing should be in place for the value to flow across the ecosystem’, Data analytics lead or data architect has to evaluate AI application design, feasibility of implementing AI solutions through the lens of data fabric architecture, interoperability, data strategy & quality (structured, clean, semi-structured or just not good, is the data proprietary hosted within or public cloud to name a few..)
> Enterprise Architect capable of evaluating current state applications and recommending solutions or design changes towards incorporating AI capabilities in the target state in tandem with paying close attention to  ‘cost of compute’  mapped to the enterprise cloud infrastructure implemented within the company. Cloud costs have been the number one reason for derailment of AI adoption and scaling and hence put your best laid out plans to jeopardy.
> AI engineer or core development team reporting within the AI product team that has the ownership of the tools and tech stack, are responsible for establishing guidelines or some basic framework on the AI techstack like what LLM model to be used or are available, model size recommendation based on the use case and dataset, the GPU compute power, setup Reinforced Human feedback Loop component into their training model, the solution or standard COTS or custom build. Educating the respective development teams on their process of build, baked with the mindset  of collecting feedback from the algorithms to monitor the cloud cost on bi weekly or a monthly basis. Instructing and influencing the teams on the importance of documenting each iterations, prompt engineering inputs, the outputs generated.
> Cybersecurity professionals to build trust and security into AI use. Protect the data that powers AI. Task the individual teams to classify sensitive data used in training or fine tuning and implement data loss prevention techniques to prevent data leakage through prompts. Enforce access policies and controls around machine learning data sets. Expand threat modeling to cover generative AI-specific threats like data poisoning and outputs containing sensitive data or inappropriate content. Educate the teams the cybersecurity threats that come with generative AI. On the flip side, using generative AI/AIOps for cybersecurity is a force multiplier.
> Legal team to make sure the dataset is ethical, not subject to copyright violations and incorporate the regulatory changes in terms of compliance, guardrails into their system design process rolled out by the latest administration in the US.

Roles and Responsibilities of AI CoE.

> Closing the technology and Knowledge gap: Organizations success towards the adoption of genAI/AI adoption depends on the focus of change management. In many ways, genAI is probably the biggest technology shift that is as big as the internet, at least in my opinion. It is taking big strides in movement on the S-curve. Hence to embrace genAI the right way, the CoE needs to focus on establishing guidelines, conducting workshops, engaging employee workforce and ongoing training. Part of the training  is to cover what to do and what not to do and then evolve into quickly sharing the best practices  and how to get more value out of the tools.
> Roll out focus group pilots for general purpose applications used across the enterprise like SAP Joule for Successfactors employee service, Servicenow AI agents for ITIL process, Microsoft copilot for 365 product service or Google Gemini for Google service products, OR github co-pilot service for the software development teams thus targeting specific business processes, going all out with providing assistance  with robust change management. Grab low hanging fruit by applying generative AI to the apps that are already modernized.
> Collaborate extensively with the Data governance team to build a strong data culture and improve the data strategy. Identify the gaps, understand their needs and work in tandem to strengthen the data pillar as well. You will reap the harvest multifold later in the journey.
> Go after opportunities that were previously off limits - applications and processes in core systems by modernization of legacy systems.
> Throughout this journey, AI governance, establishing  guidelines, ensuring that a human verifies the outputs of quality controls for the genAI outputs are in place and providing risk awareness training to all users is critical to a successful adoption. And yes, it requires time and energy to execute it. 
> Above all, the AI CoE team has to stay on top with the latest regulatory changes, breakthrough developments in LLMs space, cloud hardware advancements related to AI chips and sharply focus on possible risks and compliance changes in a rapidly volatile and changing geopolitical landscape. 
> Sustainability - Paying close attention to long term Sustainability and reducing carbon footprint through effective data strategy that translates into clean datasets and that in turn propels efficient use of LLMs with reduced compute power is another important parameter to be considered.

Get Ready for the Coming Wave: It is hard not to get excited about what can be done with generativeAI and not be scared or anxious as well as to where this can go. Industries will change. Global World order will change. Customer expectations will change. How we work will change. There will be the birth of new AI native companies that will start without tech debt and with speed advantage.
